SOURCE_URL: https://www.orbix.studio/blogs/bento-grid-dashboard-design-aesthetics

Bento Grid Dashboard Design: Complete Guide 2026

Contact Us 

Table of Contents

What is Bento Grid Dashboard Design?

Why Bento Grid Design Matters for SaaS Products

How to Design a Bento Grid Dashboard Step by Step

Real-World Bento Grid Dashboard Examples Worth Studying

Bento Grid Dashboard Design Mistakes to Avoid

Bento Grid Accessibility: The Gap Most Designers Skip

Final Thoughts

Frequently Asked Questions

AI Summary

ChatGpt

claude

Gemini

perplexity

grok

Ready to bring
your SaaS to life?

Design, build, and launch with one team.

Talk to our team

Last Update:

Jul 21, 2026

Design System

Bento Grid Dashboard Design: How to Build Modular UIs That Actually Work 

Apple used a bento grid on the iPhone 15 Pro product page, and within six months, every SaaS dashboard designer was trying to replicate it. The problem is that most of those replications missed the point.

A bento grid dashboard is not a visual style. It is an information architecture decision one that controls cognitive load by giving each piece of data its own spatial weight. When designers copy the aesthetic without understanding that logic, they build layouts that look like bento boxes but work like a cluttered spreadsheet.

This guide covers exactly how bento grid dashboard design works in 2026: the CSS Grid structure behind it, the visual hierarchy rules that make it scannable, the Figma workflow, the accessibility requirements most designers skip, and real-world examples from products doing it right. By the end, you will know how to design bento grid dashboard that earns trust from users in the first six seconds.

What is Bento Grid Dashboard Design?

A bento grid dashboard is a modular UI layout where the interface divides into rectangular tiles of varying sizes, each containing one type of content: KPI number, chart, status indicator, or an action button.

The name comes from the Japanese bento box: compartmentalized lunch container where each section holds a different food type, neatly separated and easy to scan at glance. The UI pattern follows the same principle. Each tile is self-contained. Each tile has one job.

What separates bento grid from standard card-based dashboard layout is deliberate asymmetric tile sizing. In card layout, every card shares the same height and width. In bento grid, tiles span different numbers of columns and rows; hero KPI tile might span 6 columns while four smaller status indicators sit beside it in 2×2 arrangement.

That asymmetry is intentional. It creates visual hierarchy through spatial weight: the bigger the tile, the more important the data inside it. No extra labels needed. The layout itself tells users where to look first.

Bento grid tile anatomy:

Tile TypeTypical Grid SpanCommon Content

Hero tile4–6 columns × 2 rowsPrimary KPI, MRR, conversion rate

Feature tile3–4 columns × 1–2 rowsLine charts, sparklines, trend data

Metric card2–3 columns × 1 rowSecondary KPIs, status indicators

Accent tile1–2 columns × 1 rowAlerts, quick actions, icon stats

Why Bento Grid Design Matters for SaaS Products

SaaS dashboards have a data density problem. Product analytics tools like Amplitude, Mixpanel, and Datadog need to surface 15–30 distinct metrics on one screen without overwhelming users in the first few seconds.

Traditional grid layouts equal-width cards arranged in linear sequence fail this challenge. Every card competes for the same amount of attention. Users have to scan labels and parse numbers to find what matters. Cognitive load spikes. Dwell time drops.

A well-designed bento grid solves this through Gestalt principles. The law of proximity groups related metrics in adjacent tiles. The law of similarity applies consistent styling within data categories. F-pattern scanning the natural left-to-right, top-to-bottom reading path users follow gets guidedby tile placement, so the hero KPI anchors the top-left and secondary data fills right and below.

Nielsen Norman Group's research on data-heavy interfaces shows users form their first impression of dashboard's usefulness in under six seconds. A bento grid compresses that judgment in the designer's favor spatial weight pre-answers "where do I look?" before users consciously think about it.

Bento grid vs. card layout: direct comparison

CriterionBento GridCard Layout

Visual hierarchyBuilt into tile sizingRequires labels and color coding

Cognitive loadLower spatial weight signals importanceHigher uniform cards compete equally

Data densityHigh tiles pack and span efficientlyMedium equal sizing creates wasted whitespace

Responsive complexityHigher spans need explicit breakpoint rulesLower cards stack naturally

Design time (upfront)HigherLower

ScalabilityHigh new tiles slot into the grid systemMedium adding cards disrupts visual rhythm

How to Design a Bento Grid Dashboard Step by Step

1. Build the Grid Foundation With CSS Grid

Every bento grid dashboard starts with CSS Grid not Flexbox. Flexbox is one-dimensional: it arranges items in a row or column. CSS Grid is two-dimensional, which is what you need for tiles that span multiple columns and rows simultaneously.

Start with a 12-column grid. This gives maximum flexibility tiles can span 2, 3, 4, 6, or 12 columns with clean proportions that avoid awkward gaps.
.dashboard-grid {
display: grid;
 grid-template-columns: repeat(12, 1fr);
 grid-template-rows: auto;
 gap: 16px;
 padding: 24px;
}
.tile-hero {
 grid-column: span 6;
 grid-row: span 2;
}
.tile-metric {
 grid-column: span 3;
 grid-row: span 1;
}
.tile-chart {
 grid-column: span 4;
 grid-row: span 2;
}

For teams who prefer named zones, grid-template-areas makes the layout readable in code reviews:
.dashboard-grid {
 grid-template-areas:
"hero hero hero hero hero hero metric1 metric1 metric1 metric2 metric2 metric2""hero hero hero hero hero hero chart chart chart chart alert alert";
}
For Tailwind CSS implementations, col-span-* and row-span-* utilities map directly to grid-column: span X and grid-row: span X. Component libraries like shadcn/ui and Radix UI provide accessible tile container cards with correct ARIA roles so you are not building accessible wrappers from scratch.

For no-code tools: Framer and Webflow both support CSS Grid through visual breakpoint editors. Framer's grid component allows span overrides per breakpoint. Webflow's Grid element maps to grid-template-areas via its column/row editor. Both are viable for bento grid prototypes or production builds, though neither gives you the same fine-grained control as raw CSS Grid in React or Next.js.

2. Assign Tile Sizes Based on Data Priority Not Content Volume

This is where most designers make their first mistake: sizing tiles based on how much content needs to fit inside them. In bento grid, tile size must reflect data importance, not data volume.

Apply this priority framework before you design single tile:

Tier 1 Hero tiles: The one or two numbers the user needs before anything else. For SaaS product: MRR, active users, churn rate, or trial-to-paid conversion rate. Size: 4–6 columns × 2 rows. Limit: two hero tiles per dashboard screen maximum.

Tier 2 Feature tiles: Supporting context data that gives the hero number meaning. 30-day revenue trend, weekly active user cohort, funnel stage breakdown. Size: 3–4 columns × 1–2 rows.

Tier 3 Metric cards: Secondary KPIs and status signals that matter but do not drive the user's primary decisions. Individual feature usage, error rates, pending queue lengths. Size: 2–3 columns × 1 row.

Tier 4 Accent tiles: Quick actions, alerts, and navigation shortcuts. One piece of information per accent tile. Size: 1–2 columns × 1 row.

If user has to read labels to understand which number matters most, the tile sizing is wrong. The visual hierarchy should communicate priority before the user processes a single word.

3. Match Content Types to Tile Sizes

Not every content type works in every tile size. A 2-column tile cannot hold a time-series chart with 30 data points and readable axis labels. A 6-column hero tile looks sparse with a single number and no supporting context.

Content-to-tile-size reference:

Tile SizeWorks wellAvoid

1–2 columnsSingle KPI number, icon + stat, alert badge, CTA buttonCharts, multi-series data, tables

3–4 columnsSparkline, bar chart, donut chart, progress ringGantt charts, data-dense tables

5–6 columnsArea chart, comparative bar chart, summary tableSingle numbers (spatial waste)

12 columns (full-width)Activity feed, full analytics chart, heat mapKPI numbers, simple metrics

Apply progressive disclosure across tile depth. The bento grid shows the signal in the dashboard-level summary. A click into the tile shows the noise and the drill-down detail. This is how Datadog and Linear handle data-dense environments: the grid renders the overview, the click-through renders the full dataset. Users who only need the overview never see the noise. Users who need the detail know exactly where to find it.

For dark mode implementations: test glassmorphism tile effects (backdrop blur + semi-transparent backgrounds) carefully. GPU-accelerated CSS backdrop-filter performs well on modern hardware but causes frame drops on lower-end devices. Use @media (prefers-reduced-motion) to disable animations for users with motion sensitivity, and test tile contrast ratios under both dark and light themes before shipping.

Real-World Bento Grid Dashboard Examples Worth Studying

Apple (product marketing): Apple's iPhone 14 and 15 Pro announcement pages brought bento grid layout into mainstream design conversation. Their implementation uses large tiles for hero features, camera system, chip performance and small tiles for secondary specs. The lesson for dashboard designers: spatial weight communicates feature priority even before the user reads words. Apple's bento grids work because the layout is the communication.

Linear (project management): Linear's dashboard overview uses near-bento layout for project status screens. Active sprints occupy large tiles with visual progress indicators. Individual issue counts sit in smaller metric cards. The layout signals project health on track, at risk, blocked without a single chart. Pure information architecture.

Datadog (observability): Datadog's dashboard builder is the most technically mature bento implementation in the SaaS space. Users resize tiles across a 12-column CSS Grid with snap-to-grid behavior that prevents gaps. The grid supports 20+ widget types from time-series charts to service maps all within the same bento structure. Custom dashboards from their user base are the clearest proof that a well-built bento grid system scales to complex real-world data without breaking hierarchy.

Notion (productivity): Notion's home screen (redesigned late 2024) adopted bento grid for recent pages, team activity, and database views. Pinned pages get large tiles (4 columns). Recent documents get small tiles (2 columns). Status widgets occupy accent tiles. The hierarchy communicates that pinned content is important, recent content is secondary without a single "Important" label.

Payhawk (fintech): Payhawk's expense management dashboard uses bento layout for financial KPIs total spend, budget variance, pending approvals. Each tile is one data point with a trend indicator. A non-finance user can scan the dashboard and understand company spending health in under four seconds. That is the metric that matters for B2B SaaS dashboard: time to insight, not visual novelty.

Bento Grid Dashboard Design Mistakes to Avoid

Mistake 1: Equal tile sizes across the grid. If all tiles are the same size, you have a card layout with rounded corners not bento grid. Hierarchy comes from size variation. Go back to priority tiers and resize based on data importance, not content length.

Mistake 2: Too many hero tiles. Two hero tiles per screen section is the practical limit. Three hero tiles cancel each other out; the user's eye has no anchor point and cognitive load returns to card-layout levels. If everything is a priority, nothing is.

Mistake 3: No responsive behavior plan. A 6-column hero tile on desktop becomes unreadable on a 375px mobile screen at half its desktop width. Define tile collapse rules before you design. At 768px: hero tiles drop to full-width. At 375px: all tiles stack to 12 columns. Use container queries instead of viewport media queries where tiles sit inside nested layout wrappers. Container queries respond to the tile's parent width, not the viewport, which produces more predictable results.

Mistake 4: Ignoring Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS). Bento grids that load tile content asynchronously charts pulling live API data cause layout shifts when tiles expand to fit content after initial render. Google's Core Web Vitals penalize CLS scores above 0.1. Set explicit min-height on all tiles before data loads. Use skeleton loading states that match the tile's filled dimensions. This one fix can move the Lighthouse performance score by 10–15 points.

Mistake 5: Treating whitespace as empty space. The gap property in CSS Grid is layout element, not an absence of design. A 16px gap creates the visual separation that makes the compartmentalized structure legible. Below 8px, tiles merge into an undifferentiated block. Above 32px on a 12-column grid, the layout reads as a collection of isolated elements rather than a cohesive system. 16px gap, 24px padding on the grid container that is the starting point for SaaS dashboards.

Mistake 6: Overloading accent tiles. A 2-column accent tile holds one piece of information clearly. Two pieces become a compressed card. Three becomes illegible. If you are reducing font size inside small tiles to make content fit, the tile is doing too much. Either increase the tile's span or split the content into two tiles.

Bento Grid Accessibility: The Gap Most Designers Skip

This section does not appear in most bento grid tutorials. It is also the difference between a production-ready dashboard and prototype that fails an audit before launch.

CSS Grid controls visual order. Screen readers and keyboard navigation follow DOM order the sequence elements appear in the HTML source. When bento grid uses grid-column and grid-row to reposition tiles visually, the visual reading sequence and the DOM sequence can become completely different paths through the interface. A sighted user reads in visual order. A screen reader user navigates in DOM order. In poorly structured bento layouts, those are two different dashboards.

WCAG 2.1 AA compliance requirements for bento grids:

1. Tab order follow visual reading order. The safest approach: structure the DOM in the same sequence the grid renders visually. Avoid using tabindex values above 0 to force tab order; this creates accessibility debt that compounds every time the grid layout changes.

2. Every tile needs an ARIA label at the container level. A tile showing $142,000 means nothing to the screen reader without context. Apply aria-label="Monthly Recurring Revenue: $142,000" on the tile container element, not just on the number inside it. Without this, the screen reader announces numbers with no semantic meaning.

3. Color contrast must meet 4.5:1 for normal text, 3:1 for large text. Dark mode bento grids fail this requirement more often than light mode. Light gray text on a dark gray tile common in glassmorphism implementations frequently falls below the 4.5:1 threshold. Use Stark (Figma plugin), the Chrome DevTools Accessibility panel, or the axe DevTools browser extension to catch contrast failures before they ship.

4. Interactive tiles need visible focus rings. If the tile links to a detailed view or triggers an action, it must display a visible focus ring when keyboard-navigated. CSS resets routinely remove the browser default outline. Restore it explicitly:
.tile:focus-visible {
outline: 2px solid #0066CC;
 outline-offset: 2px;
}

Use: focus-visible rather than :focus so the ring appears for keyboard users but not for mouse clicks cleaner visual behavior for both audiences.

5. Skip navigation for grids with 10+ tiles. Keyboard users tabbing through a 16-tile dashboard without skipping the navigation tab through every interactive element on every tile before reaching the content they need. Add ARIA landmarks role="region" with aria-label to group related tile sections. Add skip links at the top of the dashboard that jump to named sections.

6. Live region announcements for real-time data. Tiles updating with live data revenue ticking up, alert counts changing should use aria-live="polite" so screen readers announce updates at a natural pause. Reserve aria-live="assertive" for critical alerts only. Assertive regions interrupt the user mid-sentence. Polite regions wait for a break.

Final Thoughts

Bento grid dashboard design earns its complexity cost when the product is data-dense, the users are recurring, and the hierarchy of information is non-negotiable. It does not work as a stylistic layer over an existing card grid. It works when the information architecture priority tiers, tile sizing, content mapping is decided before a single frame opens in Figma.

The designers shipping production-grade bento grids in 2026 are the ones who understand that the layout is the communication. Get the DOM order right, get the accessibility right, and the visual design follows naturally from the structure underneath it.

Frequently Asked Questions

What is bento grid design in UI?

Bento grid design is a modular layout pattern where UI content divides into rectangular tiles of varying sizes similar to Japanese bento boxes. Each tile holds one type of content: KPI, chart, or status indicator. Tile size signals data priority, giving designers control over visual hierarchy without relying on labels or color coding alone.

How is bento grid different from masonry grid?

A masonry grid arranges tiles vertically with variable heights but fixed columns think Pinterest. A bento grid uses strict CSS Grid structure where tiles span defined columns and rows. Masonry suits image galleries. Bento suits dashboards because it assigns spatial weight to specific metrics, directing the user's eye before they read a single label.

Is bento grid responsive?

Yes, when built correctly with CSS Grid using auto-fit, minmax(), and container queries. The key challenge is defining how tiles collapse on smaller viewports. Tiles spanning 4–6 columns on desktop typically drop to full-width on mobile to maintain readability and prevent content truncation at narrow screen widths.

What CSS properties power a bento grid layout?

The core properties are grid-template-columns, grid-template-rows, grid-column: span X, grid-row: span X, and gap. Using grid-template-areas lets you name grid zones explicitly in code. Production bento grids pair CSS Grid with Tailwind CSS col-span-* utilities or component libraries like shadcn/ui for accessible tile containers with consistent spacing.

How do I design a bento grid in Figma?

Set up a frame with a 12-column layout grid and 16px gutters. Build each tile size as a reusable Figma component with size variants (2-col, 4-col, 6-col). The community plugin "CSS Grid Generator" maps grid-template-areas visually before writing code. Define content type as a component property so the grid stays consistent when content changes across design iterations.

What is the ideal tile size for a bento grid dashboard?

A 12-column base grid with 16px gutters works for most SaaS dashboards. Hero KPI tiles span 4–6 columns over 2 rows. Secondary metric cards span 2–3 columns over 1 row. Charts span 4–8 columns depending on data density. The governing rule: tile size reflects data priority not content volume. Larger tile means more critical data.

Does bento grid design meet WCAG accessibility standards?

A bento grid meets WCAG 2.1 AA when built with ARIA labels on every tile container, DOM order matching visual reading order, color contrast at or above 4.5:1 for normal text, and keyboard-navigable tiles with visible focus rings. The most common failure: CSS Grid repositions tiles visually, but screen readers follow DOM order; those two paths diverge in poorly structured implementations.

Shohanur Rahman
Founder & CEO

As the Founder and CEO of Orbix Studio, Shohanur Rahman brings over ten years of experience in UI/UX and product strategy. He is adept at aiding SaaS and AI startups in their growth journeys. His articles provide practical guidance for both founders and product designers.

Read our Latest Blogs

Web Design

12 Min

Web Design Trends 2026: 8 Trends Shaping UX & Performance

The 8 web design trends shaping 2026: AI personalization, 3D/WebGL, kinetic type, glassmorphism, and Core Web Vitals. See what works and what to avoid.

Development

25 Min

13 Trusted Custom Software Development Companies 2026

13 best custom software development companies for 2026, compared by services, industries served, pricing, and the project types each one handles best.

Agency

8 Min

In-House Design Team vs Design Agency: Cost, Speed, Quality & Fit

In-house design team vs design agency: compare cost, speed, quality, scalability and control to choose the right model or hybrid setup for your business.

Orbix Studio

We design and build scalable digital products that support complex workflows and business-critical systems.

Company Deck

Drop Us a Line
hello@orbix.studio

Call Us

+1 (646) 598-7983

Services

UI/UX DesignWeb DevelopmentAI Creative ProductionDashboard DesignMVP DevelopmentWebflowSaaS DesignCustom IllustrationMobile AppMotion DesignBrandingCreative Marketing

Quick Links

Case StudiesAboutPricingCareersBlogContact

Follow Us

FacebookLinkedInInstagram(X) TwitterPinterestDribbbleBehance

Email us
hello@orbix.studio

Call Us

+1 (646) 598-7983

Limited Liability Company Based In

NEW YORK

88-12 Francis Lewis Blvd, Queens Village, NY 11427, United States

KSA

الأمير سعود بن محمد بن مقرن, Al Falah, Riyadh 13314, Saudi Arabia

DUBAI

35 35A St - Al Qusais - Al Twar Fourth - Dubai - United Arab Emirates

DHAKA

OPL Ayub Tower, Dhaka 1216

NEW YORK

88-12 Francis Lewis Blvd, Queens Village, NY 11427, 
United States

KSA

الأمير سعود بن محمد بن مقرن, Al Falah, Riyadh 13314, 
Saudi Arabia

DUBAI

35 35A St - Al Qusais - Al Twar Fourth - Dubai,
United Arab Emirates

DHAKA

OPL Ayub Tower, Dhaka 1216,
Bangladesh

© 2023-2026, Orbix Studio | All Rights Reserved.

Terms of ServicesPrivacy PolicyRefund Policy

Ready to build your next SaaS product?

Whether you're starting with an idea or improving an existing product, we'll help you find the best way to move forward

Trusted by 80+ SaaS startups & product teams

Book a Free Discovery Call

Thanks for subscribing!

We'll share practical insights to help you design, build, and grow better SaaS products.

Oops! Something went wrong while submitting the form.